# Speech and Language Processing
James H. Martin
## Chapter 1: Large Language Models

Week 1: JM3 *2.0-2.1(\*)*, 2.6 (\*), 2.7, 17.1, *2.2 (\*)*, 2.3, 2.4 (\*)

### 2.2 Morphemes: Parts of Words

**Morphemes词素**: words have **components** that themselves have coherent meanings.
>The word fox consists of one morpheme (the morpheme fox)
>
> The word cats consistsof two: the morpheme cat and the morpheme -s that indicates plural
>
> Doc work-ed care-ful-ly wash-ing the glass-es

Classes of **morphemes**: 
- **Stems** convey core meaning: small, cat, walk
- **Affixes** can modify meaning: +ed, +er, un+; suffix,prefix, infix, circumfix
    - **inflectional morphemes**: play a **syntactic** role or expresses **grammatical features**, such as marking **agreement**, and their meanings tend to be predictable.

      *eg. -s/-es for marking plural; -ed for marking the past tense*
       - 👎Agreement: long-distance dependencies
    - **Derivational morphemes**
        - may change the part of speech or meaning of a word
        - is not driven by syntactic relations or agreement outside the word
        - may be “picky”: intractibil+ity but not intractible+ness
        - applies closer to the stem; whereas inflection occurs at word edges: govern+ment+s, centr+al+ize+d

- [ ] ❗**Stems vs. lemmas**?
- **Clitics**: acts syntactically like a word but is reduced in form and attached
  
  *eg. ’ve in the word I’ve*
- **Compounds**: combine multiple stems to create a new word, as in home+work, note+book
- **Reduplication** & **Root** & **Pattern**(non-concatenative)
---
#### Morphemes can be ambiguous (in several ways)
- Stems can be ambiguous:
bank (financial institution) vs. bank (land alongside a river)
- Affixes can also be ambiguous:
+s: plural of noun (dogs), or present tense of 3rd person singular verb (swims)?
- Consider she+’s . Does it mean she is or she has?
- Morpheme **combinations** can be ambiguous.
  
        (un+tie)+able: Able to be untied

        un+(tie+able): Unable to be tied

---

(Optional)Two dimensions relevant for computational word tokenization while morphologies of language can differ along many dimensions.
- The number of morphemes per word.
    -  **isolating/analytic languages**: each word on average has just over one morpheme. *eg. Vietnamese and Cantonese广东话*
    -  **synthetic languages**: a single word may
have very many morphemes
    -  **polysynthetic**
-  The degree to which morphemes are easily segmentable
    - **agglutinative languages**: morphemes have relatively clean boundaries. *eg.Turkish*
    - **fusion languages**:  a single affix may conflate multiple morphemes *eg.Russian*
---
#### Morpheme-based tokenization

✅ reduce the sparse data problem

✅ more meaningful than individual characters, and token sequences will be shorter

❌ We will still encounter unseen tokens (e.g., rare or newly coined stems

❌ need a morphological segmentation system (morpheme tokenizer) for every language

---
#### Subword tokenization

- Basic idea: split words into frequently-occurring **sub-units** (which may or may 
not coincide with morphemes).

- Popular algorithms: **Byte Pair Encoding (BPE)** and **UnigramLM**.

- Such algorithms all have two modes:

    - **Token learner**: given a (pre-processed) training corpus, return a vocabulary of tokens (in UnigramLM, also frequencies)

    - **Token segmenter**: given a new sentence, segment it into tokens of the vocabulary according to a function (varies among tokenizers).

---
**Conclusion**: it's very difficult to use morphemes as a standard for tokenization **cross-lingually/multilingual**.
